Sometimes we want to select
database on groups and
understand aggregated
data at the group level.
We've seen that even though Pandas allows
us to iterate every row in a data frame,
it's generally very slow to do this.
Fortunately pandas has a group by
function to speed up such tasks.
The idea behind group by is that it
takes some data frame, splits it into
chunks based on some key values and then
applies computation on those chunks, and
then combines the result back
together into another data frame.
In Pandas this is referred to as
the split-apply-combine pattern.
So let's take a look at an example.
First, we'll bring in our pandas and
numpy libraries,
we'll import pandas and import numpy and
let's look at some US Census Data.
So we'll read this data from datasets
/senses.csv, and we're going to
exclude state level summarizations,
which I have a some level value of 40.
So we just want to keep those
that have a some level value 50,
it turns out there's only two some
levels in this data file 40 and 50, and
let's look at the head of that.
Okay, so that's the data that
we're going to work with.
In the first example for
group I want to use this census date.
Let's get a list of all the unique
states then we can iterate over all of
those states.
For each state we can reduce the data
frame and calculate the average.
So let's run such a task for
three times and time it, and for
this we're going to use this
cell magic function %%timeit.
So I'll say %%timeit -n3.
So I'm going to run this
cell three times and
Jupyter will present me
some of the average values.
So for state in df sub STNAME.unique.
So this projects the data frame
state name and then a list of
all the unique values in there and
we're just going to iterate over that.
We're just going to calculate the average
using numpy for this particular state.
So the average equals mp.average and
then we'll do df.where,
df sub STNAME is equal to state.
So we want to exclude
those that aren't and
we'll use a Boolean mask here .drop in a,
and
we just want to project the census 2010
pop and pass that all into average.
And then we're going to
print it to the screen.
So we're going to print counties and
state,
state have an average population of and
then we'll print the average.
We see that gets up and running.
So if you scroll down to
the bottom of that output,
you can see it takes a fair
bit of time to finish.
Now let's try another approach using group by,
so again, we're going to say timeit -n 3.
For this method, we're going to start
by telling Pandas we're interested
in grouping the state by name,
and so this is our split.
So for group, frame in df.groupby STNAME.
So we're saying that we want
to split on the state name.
You'll notice that there are two
values that we set here.
Group by actually returns a tuple
where the first value is the value of
the key that we're trying to group by,
in this case a specific state name.
And the second one is the projected data
frame that was found for this group.
So we add  a tuple back from group by.
Now, we include our logic
in the apply step and
that's just to calculate
an average of the census 2010 pop.
So here it's easy, we just say
the average is equal to mp.average and
we just project from the frame the one
column we're interested in census 2010 pop.
And we don't have to do any further
reduction here because we know it's
all for a given state, and
then we're going to print the results.
And so this looks the same print
Counties in state group have
an average population of whatever
the string of the average is.
We don't have to worry about the combined
step in this case because all of our data
transformation is actually
printing out our results.
Now, let's run this.
So that's a huge difference in speed and
improvement of roughly by two factors.
Now 99% of the time you'll use group
by on one or more columns, but you
cannot also provide a function to group
by and use that to segment your data.
So this is a bit of a fabricated example,
but
let's say that you have a big batch
job with lots of processing and
you want to work only on a third or
so of the states at a given time.
We could create some function which
returns a number between 0 and
2 based on the first
character of the state name,
then we can tell group by to use this
function to split up our data frame.
It's important to note that in
order to do this you need to
set the index of the data frame to be the
column that you want to group by first.
So we'll create some new function
called set batch number, and
if the first number the parameter is
the capital M it will return a 0,
if it's a capital Q it will return a 1 and
otherwise, it will return a 2, and
then we'll pass this
function to the data frame.
So df = df.set_index STNAME and
then here's our function.
So we'll define set batch,
if items Sub 0 is less than
M then we'll return a 0.
If it's less than Q then it's in
our second batch will return 1.
Otherwise, we'll just lump it into our
last batch and we're returning to.
So the data frame is supposed to be
grouped by according to the batch number.
We're going to loop
through each batch group.
So for a group and frame in tf.groupby and
we just pass in our function
to the set batch number, and
then we'll print out there are,
let's say the length of the data
frame the number of records in group and
the group name for processing.
Notice at this time, I didn't pass
in a column name to group by,
instead I set the index of
the data frame to be STNAME.
And if no column identifiers pass, group
by I will automatically use that index.
Let's take one more look at an example
of how we might group data.
In this example I want to use
a dataset of housing from Airbnb.
In this dataset there's
two columns of interest,
one is the cancellation policy and
the other is the review scores value.
So we'll bring this in
df=pd.read_csv from datasets and
we'll bring in listings.csv, and
let's print out the head of that.
So how would I group by
both of these columns?
Our first approach might be to
promote them to a multi index and
then just call group by.
So here I'll just say df=df.set_index and
I just say I want the cancellation policy
there and the review scores value.
When we have a multi index we need to pass
in the levels that were interested in
grouping by.
By default group by does not know and
does not assume that you
want to group by all levels.
So here we just say for group and
for frame in df.groupby and
then we say we want level 0 and
1 and let's print that out.
And so there we can see that
we get lots of different
groups by both levels
that we're interested in.
So this seems to work out okay, but what
if we want to group by the cancellation
policy and review scores but separate
all of the 10s from those under 10.
In this case, we could use
a function to manage the groupings.
So we'll define some function called
groupingfun and pass in an item,
we'll check that the review scores
value portion of the index.
Item is in the format of cancellation
policy and review scores value, so
it's a tuple.
So if item sub 1 = 10,
then we're going to return item sub 0 and
10.0, so
we'll leave that one basically alone.
Otherwise, we're going to return item
sub 0 and just the string not 10 by 0,
because we just care about
breaking them into two groups.
And then for group and frame in
df.groupby we pass in our
function grouping_fun, and
let's print out the groups.
Okay, so there we see that we've
grouped by either things that have
some cancellation policy
flexible moderate strict and
super strict,
and/or some score either 10 or not 10.
Let's look at the head of our data frame.
All right, so
that's what our data frame looks like.
So to this point,
we've applied very simple processing to
our data after splitting, really just out
putting some print statements to
demonstrate how the splitting works.
The Pandas developers have three broad
categories of data processing to happen
during the apply step.
Aggregation of grouped data,
transformation of group data, and
filtration of group data.
So the most straightforward apply
step is the aggregation of data and
this uses a method called
agg()  on the group by object.
Thus far we've only iterated
through the group by object,
unpacking it into a label
the group name and a data frame.
But with agg() we can pass in
a dictionary of the columns.
We're interested in aggregating along with
the function that we're looking to apply.
So let's reset the index for
our Airbnb data.
So df = df.reset_index, and
remember you have to assign this to
the data frame or
you have to use in place equals true?
That catches me up quite a bit still so
keep that in mind.
So now let's group by
the cancellation policy and
find the average review
scores value by group.
So we want df.groupby cancellation policy.
So that's as it was before but now on
that group by object that gets returned,
we want to call .agg().
And to .agg() we give it a dictionary and
the dictionary is the column
were interested in targeting and
the operation or
the function that we're interested.
So here I'll pass in review scores value
and np.average and that's just on numpy.
So that didn't seem to work at all,
just a bunch of not a numbers.
The issue is actually in the function
that we sent to aggregate, and
this is me just showing a mistake that
I did as I was preparing this lecture.
Np.average does not ignore not a numbers.
However, there is a function
that we can use for this.
So actually I want to write the statement
all over again just the same as it was.
So do you have to group by
cancellation policy .agg().
But now in there I want to pass the
function np.nan_mean, and this just called
gets the mean values the average but
excludes not a number values from that.
Okay, so there we can see that we actually
have our review scores values for
each category in nice aggregate form.
And you can see how simple and
readable that was to write
We could just extend this dictionary
aggregate by multiple functions if we want
to or multiple columns.
So df.groupby cancellation policy call agg,
and now in our dictionary,
we just pass in all of
the different functions and
columns that were looking
to create from that value.
So we'll pass in review scores value,
I'm going to send in a tuple here,
numpy is not a number mean and numpy
is not a number of standard deviation,
and then reviews per month and here I'll
pass in the numpy not a number mean.
So take a moment to make sure you
understand the previous cell,
since it's somewhat complex.
First, we're doing a group by on the data
frame object by the column cancellation
policy.
This creates a new group by object.
Then we're invoking the ag
function on that object.
The ag function is going to apply one or
more functions that we specify to
the group data frames and
return a single row for DataFrame/group.
When we call this function we sent it
two dictionary entries each with the key
indicating which column we
wanted functions applied to.
For the first column we actually
supplied a tuple of two functions.
Note that these are not functioning
indications like mp.nan_mean with
parentheses after it or function names
like nan_mean in quotes in a string.
They're actually references to functions
which will return single values.
The group by object will
recognize the tuple and
call each function in
order on the same column.
The results will then be
in a hierarchical index but
since our columns they don't show up as
an index per say, then we indicated that
another column in a single function
we wanted to be run should be run.
So this is really important that you
understand what's happened here and
how that statement was created.
If you understand that
you're flying that's great.
If not, you really should go back and
review that statement and
this taxed or this part of the video
to understand better how this is
being called underneath.
So transformation is different
from aggregation where agg
returns a single value per column.
So one row per group, transform returns an
object that is the same size as the group.
Essentially it broadcasts the function
you supply over the group dataframe
returning a new dataframe.
This makes combining
data later quite easy.
So for instance suppose, we wanted to
include the average rating values in
a given group by cancellation policy.
But preserve the data frame shape so that
we could generate a difference between
an individual observation and the sum.
So first, let's just define some subset
of the columns that we're interested in.
So here I'm just going to
make a variable calls and
say we're interested in the cancellation
policy and the review scores value.
This just makes it a little
cleaner as I'm typing it in.
Now, let's transform, I'm going to
store this in its own data frame.
So transform df = df sub
cols.groupby cancellation
policy.transform and
I want np.nan_mean and
let's take a look at
the head of this data frame.
So we can see that the index here is
actually the same as the original data
frame, so let's just join this in.
Before we do that let's rename
the column in the transform version.
So I'm going to say transform df.rename
and I'm going to take the review scores
value because it's not actually
the review scores value anymore and
rename it to the mean review scores.
I want this axis equals columns,
and in place equals true,
and then I'm just going to
merge the data frames.
And so df = df.merge, I pass in transform
df as the other one, and I want to
merge on the indexes because the index is
between our two data frames are the same.
And let's take a look at
the new df that we've created.
So great, we consider our new columns and
place the mean review scores.
So now we could create for instance
the difference between a given row and
it's group the cancellation policy means.
So we do that just by df sub mean_diff,
so that's the new column we're
creating and assign this to np.absolute.
So I want to take the absolute value
of the review scores value minus
the mean review scores.
And so here you can see that there's
a number of things going on.
I'm taking our review scores value.
I'm vectorized passing the subtract
operator across that with
the df_mean review scores.
So we're we're making
the difference there, and
then I'm calling the absolute value
also vectorized across that and
sending it back to the mean df,
and let's take a look ahead.
So the group by object has built-in
support for filtering groups as well.
It's often that you'll want to group
by some features then make some
transformations to the groups,
then drop certain groups as
part of your cleaning routine.
The filter function takes in a function,
which it applies to each group data frame
and returns either a true or false,
depending on whether that group
should be included in the results.
For instance if we wanted to only those
groups which have a mean rating above 9
included in our results.
We'd say df.groupby,
the cancellation policy,
then we'd say .filter, and
here we would pass in a function.
So Lambda X and we just want to
take a look at the mean of X.
Again, remember we have to use nan_mean
because we have nans in there and
we just want the means where the review
score values are greater than 9.2.
Notice that the results are still indexed
but that any of the results which
were in the group with a mean
review score of less than or
equal to 9.2 were not copied over
because of how we did our projection.
By far the most common operation I invoke
on group by objects is the apply function.
This allows you to apply an arbitrary
function to each group and
stitch the results back together for
each apply into a single data frame
where the index is preserved.
So let's look at an example
using our Airbnb data.
I'm going to get a clean
copy of that data frame.
So we'll just load that from the csv,
listings.csv, and
let's just include some of the columns
that were interested in previously.
So I'm going to drop those columns
except for cancellation policy and
review scores value and
let's look at that.
In previous work we wanted to find
the average review score of a listing and
it's deviation from the group mean,
and this was a two step process.
First, we use transform on
the group by object and
then we had to broadcast
to create a new column.
With apply we could wrap
this logic in one place.
So I'm going to write a function def calc
mean_review_scores and pass in a group.
So this is working on a data frame.
So group is a data frame just of
whatever we've grouped in this case
the cancellation policy.
So we can treat this as the complete
data frame that we're operating in, so
it's a bit of a mind shift.
Here, I want to create an average value,
so
that's just equal to numpy nan_mean
of the group review_scores_value.
And then now we want to broadcast
our formula and create a new group.
So group sub review scores mean
equals np.abs, our absolute value,
the minus the group sub review scores
value, and then we'll return the group.
So now we just want to apply
this to all of the groups.
So df.groupby cancellation_policy.apply
send in our function that we want
to work on all of the groups
the calc_mean_review_scores, and
let's look at the head of this.
Using apply can be slower than using
some of the specialized functions,
especially agg().
But if your data frames are not huge,
it's a solid general-purpose approach.
Groupby is a powerful and commonly used
tool for data cleaning and data analysis.
Once you group the data by some category,
you have a data frame of
just those values, and
you can conduct aggregate analysis on
the segments that you're interested in.
The group by function follows
a split apply combined approach.
First, the data split into some groups,
then you apply some transformation
filtering or aggregation.
And then the results are automatically
combined for you by Pandas.